Dr Finskiy’s Definition of Work-Family Balance
‘To have work-family balance is to have an equilibrium in your life that allows you to meet the demands of your family life and work life. While the word balance is used, your time and resources do not necessarily need to be split evenly between the two.’
Doctor Maxim Finskiy - PhD Industrial and Organizational Psychology


Work-Family Balance
Family life and work-life form the pillars of most peoples' lives. The interaction of work and family life is studied across psychology subfields (e.g., clinical, developmental, social) and also by other disciplines such as economists and sociologists. Industrial/Organizational (I/O) professionals are mostly interested in how work and family life interact and influence the outcomes of organizational and personal goals. Work-life/work-family balance is the degree to which an individual can meet the demands connected to work as well as nonwork functions; requirements that commonly conflict. The terms work-family and work-life are widely used interchangeably, though family more refers to domestic demands while life is inclusive of family and other personal needs such as hobbies. This article focusses more on work-family balance. I/O psychologists dispute the 'balance' element of the term due to the implication that work and family are to be made equal rather than being held in equilibrium. Some studies find many feel a greater sense of work-family balance when investment into these pillars is not equal.

Work-Family Balance Perspective 
Several standard methods model work-family interaction. These models are segmentation, spillover, and compensation, and conflict. The segmentation model positions work and family as being separate and rarely interact in one's life. The compensation model holds that each pillar can serve the function of making up for another, an example of which would be a happy, healthy home-life offsetting the negative impact of a draining work-life. The spillover model puts forward that positive and negative experiences in one pillar can bleed over into the other, an argument taking place between spouses leading to an irritable, short-tempered reaction to minor issues at work being an example of negative family-to-work spillover. The conflict model holds work and family as two opposing areas of life that compete for the limited resources of an individual in order to meet their respective demands. The conflict model is the strongest held model and warrants its own discussion.

Measuring work-family balance

Work-family balance is a complex concept with many moving parts. As such, measuring the degree to which an individual has achieved a work-family balance is difficult. Many measurement techniques rely on an individual’s ability to accurately self-evaluate. Naturally, these techniques make it difficult to accurately measure work-family balance due to biases that commonly arise when individuals are expected to assess themselves. As a result, an individual’s perception of their work-family balance may not accurately represent their situation or take all factors into account. 

More comprehensive strategies exist that utilise more sources of information (e.g., managers, coworkers, clients, and family members). Measurements carried out utilising such a well-rounded strategy works to better highlight how an individual is meeting the demands within both their work life and their family life. Such an analysis allows for shortcomings and strengths in either area of one’s life to be identified and better explored. Comprehensive techniques are more resource-intensive and require a greater deal of time, personnel, and funds to carry out, making it less viable for groups of individuals than a self-evaluation.

Utilising self-evaluation and comprehensive techniques in tandem can help maximise outcomes while reducing required resources by highlighting specific areas to be explored.

Work-Family Balance as a priority of Millenials

As Millenials, people born between the early 80s and mid-90s, rise through the ranks of organizations across every industry, their needs are becoming more well known and respected. Millennials crave a healthy work-family balance, enough that they switch jobs and careers more often than other generations in order to achieve it. As Millenials are rarely disconnected from the world around them, digitally and physically, they are less likely to find an issue in blending work and family time. Just because they’ve left the office at 5, doesn’t mean they can’t or won’t continue their work at home or while out and about. This integration of work and family life leaves many millennials flocking to organizations that facilitate and encourage healthy work-family balance. A great deal of research has been conducted on this topic.

According to a 2016 study be Deloitte, millennials ranked work-life balance as being the most important factor when evaluating career opportunities. And now that millennials are entering a stage of their life where many are getting married, settling down, having children, and buying homes, achieving such a balance has never been more relevant.
